feat(system-backup/restore): add LEP (#4388)
longhorn/longhorn: enhancements/20220913-longhorn-rollout.md

# Longhorn Rollout

## Summary

Currently, Longhorn has documents to help to restore the Longhorn cluster:
- [Restore to a new cluster using Velero](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.3.0/advanced-resources/cluster-restore/restore-to-a-new-cluster-using-velero/)
- [Restore to a cluster contains data using Rancher snapshot](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.3.0/advanced-resources/cluster-restore/restore-to-a-cluster-contains-data-using-rancher-snapshot/)

However, the solution is external and not out-of-the-box.

This document proposes to improve user experience by introducing a new `rollout` feature that will dump Longhorn-related
resources and save them as a single file to the backup target. Later, users can load the rollout to the same cluster to
revert the Longhorn resources or restore it to another Longhorn cluster.

### Related Issues

https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/1455

## Motivation
### Goals

- Can generate Longhorn-relate resources dump and upload to the backup target.
- Can rollout Longhorn resources from the backup target.
- Support rollout Longhorn at a different version (ex: upgrade rollback).
- Support rollout operation using the Longhorn UI or kubectl.

> - Support restoring from `lastBackup` when the volume doesn't exist in the cluster.

Author: Mainly for new clusters, but also applies to an existing cluster if volume doesn't already exist.

- Support restore from `BackingImage`. **Dependent on https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/4165**

> ### Non-goals [optional]

Author: Updated.

***longhorn-backup-target-controller***
1. Execute engine binary [rollout list](#engine-commands).
1. Check for rollouts in the backup target that are not in the `RolloutSave` list.
1. Create new `RolloutSave`s and label with `longhorn.io/version: <version>` for the non-existing rollouts.
1. Check for rollouts in the `RolloutSave` list that are not in the backup target.
1. Delete `RolloutSave` for the non-existing rollouts.
1. Delete `RolloutSave` custom resources when the backup target is empty.

***longhorn-rollout-save-controller***
1. For `RolloutSave` with the `longhorn.io/version: <version>` label, execute the engine binary
   [rollout get-config](#engine-commands) using the `<version>`.
1. Update `RolloutSave` status from [rollout config](#rollout-cfg).

#### Manager: save rollout to the backup target

***POST /v1/rolloutsaves***
```golang
type RolloutSaveInput struct {
	Name string `json:"name"`
}
```
1. Create `RolloutSave`.
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: longhorn.io/v1beta2
   kind: RolloutSave
   metadata:
     name: <name>
     namespace: longhorn-system
   ```
1. Return rollout save resource.
   <a name="rollout-save-resource"></a>
   ```golang

>    type RolloutSave struct {

Author: Yes, for the UI. Updated.

   	client.Resource
   	Name         string                    `json:"name"`
   	Version      string                    `json:"version,omitempty"`
   	ManagerImage string                    `json:"managerImage,omitempty"`
   	State        longhorn.RolloutSaveState `json:"state,omitempty"`
   	Error        string                    `json:"error,omitempty"`
   }
   ```

***webhook validator***

1. Skip validation for backup target controller created `RolloutSave`.
1. Allow `RolloutSave` to create if met conditions.
   - The backup target is set.
   - Rollout does not exist in the backup target.

***longhorn-rollout-save-controller***
```none
rollout.zip
+ metadata.yaml
|
+ yamls/
  + apiextensions/
  | + customresourcedefinitions.yaml
  |  
  + kubernetes/
  | + clusterrolebindings.yaml
  | + clusterroles.yaml
  | + configmaps.yaml
  | + daemonsets.yaml
  | + deployments.yaml
  | + persistentvolumeclaims.yaml
  | + persistentvolumes.yaml
  | + podsecuritypolicies.yaml
  | + rolebindings.yaml
  | + roles.yaml
  | + serviceaccounts.yaml
  | + services.yaml
  |

>   + longhorn/

Author: The ShareManager is ignored because rollout volume goes through the normal volume handing flow,
- The share manager controller will create ShareManager for none-existing `rwx` volumes.
- The volume controller will sync ShareManager's image for existing detached volumes.

Any reason we need to include the ShareManager in the rollout file?

>   + longhorn/

Reviewer: No. Then ignoring share managers is fine. Thank you for the explanation!

    + engineimages.yaml
    + recurringjobs.yaml
    + settings.yaml
    + volumes.yaml
```
1. Create metadata file.
    ```golang
    type RolloutMeta struct {
    	LonghornVersion       string      `json:"longhornVersion"`

>     	LonghornGitCommit     string      `json:"longhornGitCommit"`

Reviewer: This git commit typically means the manager git commit ID. Do we need to store the commit id for other images? NO?

Author: Actually, I'm not clear on the use case of having the commit ID for all images. Can you elaborate? Or we can add them as enhancement later.

Reviewer: The engine controller will ignore the live upgrade requests when the engine images before and after the upgrade have the same commit id:
https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn-manager/blob/ce5b0c0aeefe545e9bab8e69d3f261e6c5db8bdf/controller/engine_controller.go#L1636-L1644

Reviewer: As for the manager commit ID, IIRC, it will be shown in the bottom left of the UI page when the non-official version is used

Author: Not sure if we will hit the same case. ATM We don't support rolling out to a cluster while volumes are attached.

Reviewer: OK. I just explain the general user case of the commit ID in Longhorn. It's not related to this feature.
I am fine with either retaining this or removing it.

    	KubernetesVersion     string      `json:"kubernetesVersion"`
    	LonghornNamespaceUUID string      `json:"longhornNamspaceUUID"`
    	RolloutCreatedAt      metav1.Time `json:"rolloutCreatedAt"`
    	ManagerImage          string      `json:"managerImage"`
    	EngineImage           string      `json:"engineImage"`
    }
    ```
1. Generate the API extension resource YAML file.
   - CustomResoureDefinitions with API group `longhorn.io`.
1. Generate the Kubernetes resources YAML files.
   - ServiceAccounts in the Longhorn namespace.
   - ClusterRoleBinding with any Longhorn ServiceAccounts in the `subjects`.
   - ClusterRoles with any Longhorn ClusterRoleBindings in the `roleRef`.
   - Roles in Longhorn namespace.

>    - PodSecurityPolicies with Longhorn Role in the `rules`.

Author: We can remove PSP from the rollout if we've decided to deprecate PSP in https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/4003. Since the issue hasn't been concluded, we will still handle it and I've added a note.

   `backupstore/rollouts/<longhorn-version>/<rollout-name>`.

#### Manager: list rollout saves (GET /v1/rolloutsave)
1. List `RolloutSave`.
1. Return collection of [RolloutSave](#rollout-save-resource) resource.

#### Manager: delete rollout saved in the backup target

***DELETE /v1/rolloutsaves/{name}***
1. Deletes `RolloutSave`.

***longhorn-rollout-save-controller***
1. Execute engine binary [rollout delete](#engine-commands).
1. Cleanup local generated rollout files and directory for rollout dumped resources to file but not uploaded to the
   backup target.

#### Manager: Rollout custom resource
```yaml
apiVersion: longhorn.io/v1beta2
kind: Rollout
metadata:
  annotations:
    kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration: |
      {"apiVersion":"longhorn.io/v1beta2","kind":"Rollout","metadata":{"annotations":{},"name":"demo-2-rollout","namespace":"longhorn-system"},"spec":{"rollout":"demo-2","version":"v1.4.0"}}
  creationTimestamp: "2022-08-24T04:44:51Z"
  finalizers:
  - longhorn.io
  generation: 1
  name: demo-2-rollout
  namespace: longhorn-system
  resourceVersion: "283819"
  uid: ef93355d-3b73-4fdd-bed3-ec5016a6784d
spec:

>   rollout: demo-2

Author: The intention to separate the CR name and `Spec.rollout` is to allow the user to keep records of the past success/failed Rollouts instead of having to replace the CR for every rollout.

>   rollout: demo-2

Reviewer: Got it. This is the specified RolloutSave name. The naming is a little bit confusing..

>   version: v1.4.0

Author: Yes, the intention is to group the backup store rollouts base on the Longhorn versions.

>   version: v1.4.0

Reviewer: Then why does the rollout record it? This is already recorded in `RolloutSave.Status`

>   version: v1.4.0

Author: You are right! We don't need it.

>   version: v1.4.0

Author: Removed.

1. Unzip rollout.
1. Decode the resources from files.
    ```golang
    type RolloutLists struct {
    	customResourceDefinitionList *apiextensionsv1.CustomResourceDefinitionList

    	clusterRoleList        *rbacv1.ClusterRoleList
    	clusterRoleBindingList *rbacv1.ClusterRoleBindingList
    	roleList               *rbacv1.RoleList
    	roleBindingList        *rbacv1.RoleBindingList

    	daemonSetList  *appsv1.DaemonSetList
    	deploymentList *appsv1.DeploymentList

    	configMapList             *corev1.ConfigMapList
    	persistentVolumeList      *corev1.PersistentVolumeList
    	persistentVolumeClaimList *corev1.PersistentVolumeClaimList
    	serviceAccountList        *corev1.ServiceAccountList

    	podSecurityPolicyList *policyv1beta1.PodSecurityPolicyList

    	engineImageList  *longhorn.EngineImageList
    	recurringJobList *longhorn.RecurringJobList
    	settingList      *longhorn.SettingList
    	volumeList       *longhorn.VolumeList
    }
    ```
    - Kubernetes resources from files in the `kubernetes` directory.
    - API extension resources from files in the `apiextensions` directory.
    - Longhorn resources from files in the `longhorn` directory.

> 1. Restore resources asynchronously and annotate with `longhorn.io/last-rollout`, and `longhorn.io/last-rollout-at`.

Reviewer: But the below resources will be restored in sequence, right?

Author: There will be a go routine running for each KIND of resource. The go routine will also check for resource dependencies before rolling out, ex: persistent volume must exist before rolling out the persistent volume claim.

# Longhorn Rollout

## Summary

> Currently, Longhorn has documents to help to restore the Longhorn cluster:
> - [Restore to a new cluster using Velero](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.3.0/advanced-resources/cluster-restore/restore-to-a-new-cluster-using-velero/)
> - [Restore to a cluster contains data using Rancher snapshot](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.3.0/advanced-resources/cluster-restore/restore-to-a-cluster-contains-data-using-rancher-snapshot/)
> 
> However, the solution is external and not out-of-the-box.
> 
> This document proposes to improve user experience by introducing a new `rollout` feature that will dump Longhorn-related
> resources and save them as a single file to the backup target. Later, users can load the rollout to the same cluster to
> revert the Longhorn resources or restore it to another Longhorn cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This feature is to support Longhorn cluster backup & restore, and also helps with rollback the cluster to the previous healthy state after a failed upgrade.

Currently, Longhorn has documents to guide users on how to restore the Longhorn cluster as below; however, the solution relies on third-party tools, not out-of-the-box, and also involves tedious human intervention.
- [Restore to a new cluster using Velero](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.3.0/advanced-resources/cluster-restore/restore-to-a-new-cluster-using-velero/)
- [Restore to a cluster contains data using Rancher snapshot](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.3.0/advanced-resources/cluster-restore/restore-to-a-cluster-contains-data-using-rancher-snapshot/)

With this new feature, Longhorn's custom resources will be backed up and bundled as a system backup file, then saved to the remote backup target. 

Later, users can choose a system backup to restore to a new cluster or an existing cluster; nevertheless, it can help with the cluster rollback to fix the corrupted cluster state just after a failed upgrade.

```

Reviewer 2: Don't suggest making the new term in the summary, but rather keep the summary w/ clear descriptions of what problems you would like to resolve instead. 

The new terminologies can be introduced later to avoid some confusion w/ the correct backup or context.

Author: Updated.

### Related Issues

https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/1455

## Motivation
### Goals

> - Can generate Longhorn-relate resources dump and upload to the backup target.
> - Can rollout Longhorn resources from the backup target.
> - Support rollout Longhorn at a different version (ex: upgrade rollback).
> - Support rollout operation using the Longhorn UI or kubectl.
> - Support restoring from `lastBackup` when the volume doesn't exist in the cluster.

Reviewer 2: For some items, you can aggregate to make goals clear and complete.

```suggestion
- Support system/cluster backup via backing up Longhorn custom resources, bundle them, and upgrade to the backup target.  (Original: `RolloutSave`, but how about `SystemBackup`?)
- Support system/cluster restore to a new/existing cluster from a system backup (Original: `Rollout`, but how about `SystemRestore`?)
- Support restoring volume from `lastBackup` when the volume doesn't exist in the cluster during the system restore.
```

Author: I am ok with different namings.
So we also need to have different names for the 3 controllers:
- rollout-save controller > system-backup controller
- rollout controller > system-restore controller
- rollout-load controller > system-rollout controller

Also the file name:
- rollout.zip > system-backup.zip

WDYT @innobead @shuo-wu ?

Reviewer: I am fine with the new naming. Or as I mentioned, modifying the remote file naming as rollout-save.zip

Reviewer 2: `system-rollout controller`, probably `system-restore-rollout controller`?

@c3y1huang I know you already spent efforts on it, so if you are confident about these changes, and no one has different preferences, then let's go with the new naming to make it much meaningful.

Author: Updated.

> ### Non-goals [optional]

Reviewer 2: Update each item in this section accordingly if needed due to naming change.

Author: Updated.

- This feature does not deploy the Longhorn cluster. Users need to have a running Longhorn cluster to rollout.
- Do backup/restore the downstream workloads attached to Longhorn volumes. For example, if a cluster has a Pod with a
  PersistentVolumeClaim. Longhorn will rollout the PersistentVolumeClaim, PersistentVolume and Volume only. After a
  successful rollout, the user can re-deploy the pod with the same manifest.
- Rollout while there are volumes still attached.
- Automatically save pre-upgrade rollout and load when Longhorn upgrade fails.
- Delete resources none-existing to the rollout. We can probably enhance it later and make this an option for the users.
- Support restore from `BackingImage`. **Dependent on https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/4165**

## Proposal

> ### Save Rollout

Reviewer 2: When doing system backup, anything users need to pay attention or prerequisites like I asked in the system restore section.

Author: https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/pull/4388#discussion_r997806385

```

>         |----------- [[ longhorn-backup-target controller ]] ----------|

Reviewer 2: This part is very similar to what we do for Backup? I will be great for design if something we can abstract or consolidate here, but it can be a later work. 

The flow is general, but just the resource different: one is backup, and the other is system-backup.

Author: Yes, it's similar.

        |                                                              |
        v                                                              v
[ RolloutSave ] ---> [[ longhorn-rollout-save controller]] ---> [ object store ]
                                                                       |
                                                               backupstore/rollouts/
                                                                       |
                                                   [  rollout.zip ] <--|--> [ rollout.cfg ]
```

1. Introduce new [v1/rolloutsaves](#longhorn-manager-http-api) HTTP APIs.
1. Introduce a new [RolloutSave](#manager-rolloutsave-custom-resource) custom resource definition.

>     - A new custom resource triggers the resources dump and uploads the generated rollout file to the backup target.

Reviewer 2: Can you mention what CRDs and their resources will be backed up? as you explained in Rollout/system restore section.

Author: Added anchor and link.

    - Deleting the custom resource triggers deletion of the rollout saved in the backup target.
      This behavior is similar to the current backup resource handling.
    - The saved rollouts in the backup target will sync to the custom resources list.
1. Introduce new responsibility to `longhorn-backup-target` controller.
    - Responsible to sync rollout in the backup target to the `RolloutSave` list.
    - Each of the `RolloutSave` created by this controller will have the `longhorn.io/version: <version>` label.

> 1. Introduce a new `longhorn-rollout-save` controller.

Reviewer 2: As I mentioned, this is similar to `backup-controller` today.

    - Responsible for generating the rollout file and uploading it to the backup target.
      1. Generates the Longhorn resources YAML files.
      1. Compress resources to a zip file.
      1. Upload to the backup target `backupstore/rollouts/<longhorn-version>/<rollout-name>`.
      >**Note:** Do not generate the rollout archive for the backup target controller created `RolloutSave`.

    - Responsible for deleting rollout saved in the backup target.
    - Responsible for updating `RolloutSave` status.
    - Responsible for updating the error message in the `RolloutSave` status condition.
      Reference [Rollout](#manager-rollout-custom-resource) condition as the example.

> ### Rollout

Reviewer 2: When doing the system restore, does the system need to be maintenance mode like all volumes needed to detached? I feel it's not possible to do something similar to engine upgrade during the system upgrade.

If there is some limitation or pre-conditions, need to emphasize or add to the implementation.

Author: They are covered in the `webhook validator` sections.

Author: Also noted to the proposal sections for visibility.

                                                          |          |
                                                          |          v               
                                                          | <--- [ Volume: from backup ]
                                                          |
                                                          V
                                                   [ Resources ]]]]
```

1. Introduce new [v1/rollouts](#longhorn-manager-http-api) HTTP APIs.
1. Introduce a new [Rollout](#manager-rollout-custom-resource) custom resource definition.
    - A new custom resource triggers the creation of a rollout job.
    - Deleting the custom resource triggers the deletion of the rollout job.
1. Introduce a new `longhorn-rollout` controller.
    - Responsible for creating a new rollout job that runs a `longhorn-rollout-load` controller.
    - Responsible for deleting the rollout job.
1. Introduce a new `longhorn-rollout-load` controller. This controller is similar to the `uninstall controller`.
    - Run inside the pod created by the rollout job.
    - Responsible for downloading the rollout from the backup target.

>     - Responsible for restoring resources from the rollout file.

Reviewer 2: As discussed before, few requestions:
- Can explain how it will work for restoring the system backup to an existing cluster or how is the difference than rollback the failed cluster to a previous healthy state?
- For restoring to the existing cluster, how to handle the resource version different (for example: v1beta1 -> v1, v1 -> v1beta1). (We discussed it should work, but it is worth explaining here) 
- If cross-version system restore will be a concern, what version policy will be to limit the restore path

Author: Added notes.

***Command: rollout list***
| Argument         | Usage                                              |
| -----------------| -------------------------------------------------- |
| 0                | destination backup target URL where rollouts exist |

1. List rollouts in the object store.
    ```
    map[string]string{
      "demo-1": "backupstore/rollouts/v1.4.0/demo-1",
      "demo-2": "backupstore/rollouts/v1.4.0/demo-2",
    }
    ```

<a name="cmd-rollout-get-config"></a>

***Command: rollout get-config***
| Flag             | Usage                                              |
| -----------------| -------------------------------------------------- |
| dest             | destination backup target URL where rollout exists |
| longhorn-version | Longhorn version of the rollout                    |
| rollout-name     | rollout name                                       |

1. Output the [rollout config](#rollout-cfg) from the object store.

### Test plan

#### Rollout Save
- Test rollout save to the backup target.
- Test rollout save should fail when the backup target is empty.
- Test rollout save should fail when the backup target is unreachable.

> #### Rollout

Reviewer 2: Can we add a test case when a rollout failed in the middle? What's the state and how to recover by retry/create another rollout.

Author: Updated.

1. Delete `RolloutSave` for the non-existing rollouts.
1. Delete `RolloutSave` custom resources when the backup target is empty.

***longhorn-rollout-save-controller***
1. For `RolloutSave` with the `longhorn.io/version: <version>` label, execute the engine binary
   [rollout get-config](#engine-commands) using the `<version>`.
1. Update `RolloutSave` status from [rollout config](#rollout-cfg).

#### Manager: save rollout to the backup target

***POST /v1/rolloutsaves***
```golang
type RolloutSaveInput struct {
	Name string `json:"name"`
}
```
1. Create `RolloutSave`.
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: longhorn.io/v1beta2
   kind: RolloutSave
   metadata:
     name: <name>
     namespace: longhorn-system
   ```
1. Return rollout save resource.
   <a name="rollout-save-resource"></a>
   ```golang
    type RolloutSave struct {
    	client.Resource
    	Name         string                    `json:"name"`
    	Version      string                    `json:"version,omitempty"`
    	ManagerImage string                    `json:"managerImage,omitempty"`
    	State        longhorn.RolloutSaveState `json:"state,omitempty"`

>     	Created      string                    `json:"created,omitempty"`

Reviewer: `CreatedAt`

Author: Updated.
